So planning 621 and planning 623 were courses that
were created to try to address the interest that
was emerging on campus by some students who wanted
to work in developing countries. And in time, as I
offered them more and more, there seemed to be more
interest for the planning 623 course because it
was a broader course. It covered not only Latin
America, but also the other parts of the
developing world and the third world. And I then
began to teach that one more often, 623. And the
Latin 621 was just specialized in Latin America
less often, because I was able to attract all
types. And it really made for a more interesting
class. And that's being taught to this day. So
let's take a look at the structure of the
university, the college, and the department when
you return from Cali. Well, we had, of course, a
program chairman, which I interpret to be a
department, since we were a department at the
time, as I recall, a department of the college.
Yes, the department existed within the college.
But I'm trying to remember when we became
accredited, but I think we were accredited in 1968
by the AIP.
So that means that veteran would have been in
existence for three years is one of the
requirements, have reduced a certain number of
minimum number of graduates. Right. Was an
autonomous unit within the college, meaning a
department. Had control of our own budget. We
meant control of its budget and the department
had, could in fact assign, was assigned a
department operating expense in faculty
positions. And so that all those criteria were
required by AIP at the time. and had been met in
there because we were accredited, if I recall, in
1968 was the first year we became accredited. And I
believe it was the first program in the state of
Texas to receive such a recognition. So we had the
departmental format and small faculty, to be
sure, a growing department. It was a young,
growing department struggling to establish
itself and develop a constituency, of course, and
build up the course offerings.
Well, how was it structured? Who was leading who?
How did we report to the university structure?
Well, of course, the department head reported to
the dean. The department head was Joe McGraw.
Joseph McGraw, Joe McGraw. Then he reported, of
course, to Ed Romanek, who was the dean at the time.
But it was my understanding that our academic
programs was not lodged in the College of
Architecture. It was in the College of
Engineering. And our administrative dean was the
architecture dean.
And so that all of our faculty salaries were those
of the College of Engineering. And then when that
was changed, because when I was hired, I had to
interview with Dean Benson of engineering, not
Ramanek. I see. OK, yeah. I
don't remember that experience myself, because I
interviewed with Ed Romnick, yes, and I didn't
interview with Dean Benson. I remember that you
mentioned that initially when the program was
first recommended, It was supposed to, because
the College of Architecture, when it was the
School of Architecture, was under the Dean of
Engineering, was part of the School of
Engineering, or the College of Engineering. But a
school within the college. A school within the
college. Then they changed it from a school and
made it a full-fledged college. And of course,
that wasn't existed by the time I came back. Do you
know when that occurred? Oh, gee, it must have been
65, somewhere in there, if I remember correctly.
About the time that Joe McGraw got back here? Yeah,
it may have been 64, perhaps, and a little bit
before he came. And see, Joe and Ed had actually
proposed a planning program way back, long before
this, you know. I would say back in 1960, something
like that, or 59, 58, somewhere. When Joe was
originally teaching architecture. Yeah, right.
But he had gone through Harvard and city planning
and, of course, had the planning background
experience and began to teach planning-related
subjects within the school. programs, and Ed had
expressed an interest in, yes, setting up a
funding emphasis and a funding program. So they
had submitted those ideas way back, and I guess
those were used then to create, once the College
was created of architecture, College of
Architecture and Environmental Design was
created, then they resubmitted the request for
establishing a department, and this was a new
college establishing departments, and the idea
was accepted. And I suppose because they'd been
part of the engineering college, then they felt
that they needed this coordination with
engineering in making this transition and
establishing the program jointly. But that
doesn't, then when did we report to the
interdisciplinary committee that Van Riper from
political science and the other faculty members,
Virgil Stover from civil engineering, And what's
his name from Parks and Recreation? Like the clear
gun? Clear gun. Well, as I recall, that was a...
What's his name from geography? Sonnenfeld.
Okay, well, that was a committee that I guess
existed before I came, and as I understood it, that
was a committee that the department had us to work
with and coordinate with, although... And report
to. I suppose, yeah. Periodically.
Periodically. That's part of a coordinated
effort. But I don't remember any gatherings as
such, you know, that we had with them. I assume that
the department head was communicating with them.
That's an administrative function more than
anything else. But we were running the funding
program. We felt that we were the trained people in
the field, and we knew what the field needed and
what the field required. And we had a 48 hour
recognized program, 48 credit hour recognized
program, of which about 25% were outside of the
department. And I can tell you, model program
because most of the curriculums did not require
that of other students. But we were committed to
the interdisciplinary philosophy of planning. I
was conversing with the concept that was
developed in Chicago at the University of Chicago
back in the 50s when our friend from California
Well, one of the initiators of the
interdisciplinary planning concept, and he used
the University of Chicago as his base to try to test
it. And I believe it lasted three or four years
there, and then they did away with the program. As a
matter of fact, I applied there the year that the
program collapsed. He's now the dean at UCLA. Oh,
okay. Well, who recently died. Yes, yes. Very well
known, of course, in the field throughout the
world, too. Okay. Not Voorhees. No. G.U.S. Oh,
thank you. Yeah. Okay. So we were committed to the
interdisciplinary approach to planning, so
students would be aware of the economic and social
implications of the physical needs of the field,
administrative aspects, dealing with city
government and how planning could be
implemented, and, of course, the capital
improvements aspects of it. And this broadness
required, we felt, exposure to other fields as
well. So they took courses in economics and
sociology, political science. And of course, we
modeled this curriculum. Each student was a
specially designed curriculum that met the core
requirements first. And then beyond that, then we
would specialize the curriculum to a particular
student's interests, maybe more into the
physical design or more into administrative,
political aspects, government aspects, or
perhaps social aspects. It gave the program an
interesting, how would you say, it was appealing
to many students because when they read our
catalogs, they felt they could model a curriculum
to their interest, which is very different from
other schools where they had to model it after the
faculty's interest and with very little leeway.
Well, it's a broad enough field that just about
anyone can find their own niche in it. Exactly,
exactly. And that was the point we were trying to
make, that there was just about nothing that
planning didn't touch in giving a community life,
you know. And that what we were trying to say was
that planning should be part of, on the one hand,
the policy-making part, which was to formulate
with the mayor and the council and the planning
commissioners long-range planning policy for a
community. But it also could be very technical. If
you wanted to get down to the transportation end of
it, to the housing end of it, you could get into the
technical areas and be more of a technical type.
OK. Well, so we had the university operating, I
think, department operating under this umbrella
interdisciplinary committee. And Joe McGraw was
the department head. Right. Then what was the next
change in the administration? Well, I guess
because of the unique nature of the program and the
fact that we were sort of a maverick operation,
really we were a maverick department as the
department went on this campus, we dealt with
sensitive issues that were politically based
issues. And as we talked about earlier about the
political turmoil in the country, I guess we were
sometimes looked at with strange It's a strange
operation.
We tend to sometimes ruffle feathers to put it in a
party way. Well, I think planning dealt with
government and with political issues. Yes. So
that was new for the university administration.
Here, yes. Especially at A&M, yeah. Yeah, to
handle that kind of a thing. Exactly, exactly. And
then the environmental issues became a powerful
tool and that affected our campus as well. And we
would oftentimes be outspoken about certain
issues and would bring attention to ourselves.
And our students would maybe raise questions in
classrooms oftentimes. And we would get feedback
from other faculty that our students would raise,
in fact, critical issues that other students from
other careers would not raise, you know. And they
did tend to create turmoil in the positive sense in
terms of intellectual searching. So anyway,
that, of course, and I guess there were some
problems of administration that surfaced,
allocation of funds or the use of funds or the
reporting procedures. Somehow that was brought
up or something to that effect happened. And so all
of a sudden we were in a turmoil in terms of how we
related to who and what and administration. Our
very existence was questioned at one time. And in
fact, I saw a memorandum was handed to me one time
showing some wording to the effect that they might
abolish the department. So I became very
concerned about this because I had made, you know,
made an effort to come back to A&M to build an
interesting, a good and solid program at A&M. And I
felt we had a good faculty, a very well-educated
and experienced faculty. And I felt we had a good
program, a good format. And I felt it was just
misunderstood, and therefore, People were
maybe, you know, perhaps being a little too
critical about certain things and therefore were
putting the whole program in jeopardy. So
essentially what happened was that we were put
under basically the Dean of Engineering and the
reporting and everything else was so strict, you
know, that Professor McGraw decided he didn't
want to fall under that umbrella or didn't feel
that it was appropriate for him to be a department
head and not have the autonomy that was required.
So he decided to resign the position. So we were
left there with no department head for a while, and
the dean of the college was then asked to oversee
the department in its interim period. That was
Romany. Yes. He was dean at the time, and so he was
asked to become the overseer of the operation. But
of course, he was an architect and mostly
concerned with the College of Architecture, not
only with architecture, but the other
departments. What year was that? Gee, I'm trying
to remember. It was probably about 1970. One or
two? Sixty-nine, maybe? No, no, no. Oh, I'm sorry,
70. Yeah, 70, 70, 71. I think maybe in the fall of 70
or spring of 70, you know. Because I had just come, I
think I had just come back from Colombia, you know,
that would have been early 70. Somewhere in there.
Yeah. And so, of course, the faculty wanted to keep
the program going. And we felt strongly about it.
And we had students. And we were a growing
department. So we, of course, accepted this sort
of overview committee under the dean of
engineering. And so then Dean Romanek asked me if,
well, began to ask me if I could look into the
secretaries, see if they needed any help or had any
questions and so forth. So it was sort of a de facto I
became like a department head. by overseeing
their work and answering this or filling out forms
and all that. So then after a semester of that, Dean
Romanek then recommended me to the
administration as interim head of the department
until, you know, some decision could be made. So
they accepted that. So I was interim department
head and worked in that position, I believe, for
about a year, maybe less. And then he elevated the
recommendation to full, you know, department
head and they accepted it and I served as the
department head position until I left to go to
Nicaragua. I was asked by AID if I would go to
Nicaragua to work on the reconstruction of
Managua and I would be principal international
advisor to the vice minister of urban planning and
I felt that by then the department had stabilized
and that we were And we were back in charge again. In
other words, the dean of engineering had seen that
we were, in fact, we were following our own
policies of 25% coursework outside of the
department. And the students were, you know,
those standards were being met and everything
else. And, in fact, we were under scrutiny by this
committee for a year, a whole year. We met over at
the graduate college under dean, who was dean of
the graduate college at the time.
Yeah, we'll remember anyway here in a moment. And
he brought the committee together. It was an
internship committee from around the campus.
Everybody except, there was nobody from the
college. They were all outside of the college. And
we would, I met all their answers and
requirements, and we reviewed curriculums. We
reviewed department programs, and we looked at
student degree programs at random. And they
asked, could we look in and see if there's an effect
happening? Because you say here that they
require, that you require 25% outside the
department. And so I said, yes, go ahead. I mean, I
had to give the clearance. They wouldn't have
looked at the files without my approval. But I went
ahead and said, yes, go ahead. So they pulled out at
random files from the graduate college records.
And they, in fact, were able to confirm that not
only did we meet the 25%, all the time we exceeded
it. So that we were, in other words, being
consistent in our policies and in their
implementation. And the other important thing
was that we were meeting the recognition criteria
of the AIP at the time.
Excuse me a minute. To the transcriber, you can go
back and fill in the name of the graduate college
dean. Was Dean George W. Kunze? Yes, exactly.
K-U-N-Z-E. K-U-N-Z-E, very much so. And so Dean
Kunze was very fair in the whole procedure. He
oversaw the whole procedure. And the committee
members, they were from political science, Ben
Riper, Paul Ben Riper. I believe it was Joe
Sonnenfeld from geography and so forth. I mean,
they were all very qualified people and very
respected faculty on the campus. And sympathetic
to the idea. Yeah. Oh, yes. Very much so. And they
were very interested in the program. They wanted
the program to succeed. And they were convinced
and they were satisfied that the program was being
run properly. And so then, at that point, they
released us from this overseer. We were then
became a full-fledged department, autonomous
department at that point. And the other important
thing was that we had to meet the AIP requirements,
and they could only be met by us, you see. That was
the important thing. That's why I'm also in favor
of standards for recognition, and because...
Well, Chewy, when you left for Nicaragua, who then
became department head? Okay, the request came in
the fall, I believe it was fall of 74, and I asked
Dean Reed at the time if he thought it would be okay.
for me to accept this appointment. And he said,
well, yes, let us begin. So Romanek had been
replaced by Ray Reed? Oh, yes, yes, that's right.
Ray Reed had come on board, I guess, two or three
years before that. From the University of Iowa.
Yes, exactly. He became the dean of the college,
exactly. I forget about that. So, you know, I
checked with him, and he said, yes, if It's an
important program. It would be a credit to the
college and to the department, to the university.
We definitely would be interested in you doing it.
And so all I'm interested in is that you can find a
way to transition and then have someone else come
on board. It would be in the spring of 75. Who did
that? And as I recall, Professor Stover, I
believe, Dr. Virgil Stover from civil
engineering, who had a joint appointment with
planning. was asked then to serve as interim
department head. He served for one semester. I
believe so, because then, well, let's see, was
there somebody else then? He served for one
semester and one summer, I believe it was. And I
might add personally that Stober's
administration was quite a surprise to everybody
because he turned He was extremely liberal in his
administration, and he was very
concerned with any individual's problems and
trying to solve them. And although mistakes were
made, they were honest mistakes, and he moved very
quickly to correct them. So that as an interim
department head, in my judgment, he was
excellent. That's good. I didn't experience that
because I was abroad. Either way. But I had a, I'm
telling you, for me it was a grim experience as a
department head because my job was to protect the
department from extinction. And I felt that I had
done that job and I had no, ever had any aspirations
to be a department head in the first place. But I
felt that we needed to protect the department and
that happened. And so when this opportunity
developed in Manawa, which is an interesting
assignment, I said, I would like to try it, you
know. Well, why was the department so near to being
abolished by the administration? Well, again, I
think it was this misunderstanding about what we
were about, and they just weren't quite ready at
the time to accept the fact that departments could
get involved with politically-based issues and
really get out there and do things. You know, we
were involved in the Model Cities program. That
was something that Joe McGraw got us into way back,
and I think it occurred a little bit before I came to
the department, when we first got involved with
it, and we would send out interns out to the
communities, and they would deal with very,
really serious social and economic problems,
with deteriorated neighborhoods that were, you
know, up in arms, because how come we don't have
water and sewer, and, you know, no funds to repair
our homes, so the model cities program was a very
important internship, part of our internship
program, and we made that Eventually that became a
model, and we used that. I can see that that would be
upsetting to the administration that was not used
to having such activist roles. Exactly. And
sometimes I think they also received, on
occasion, phone calls, you see, because our
students were making some pretty aggressive
recommendations to some of these communities,
and we ourselves as faculty oftentimes would make
an impression or make a suggestion that might not
set well. And though there were also some
irregularities in... the funding and
administration of resources? Yeah, there was
some accounting procedures that were not
followed. And of course, that is not necessarily,
I don't think there were any legalities in terms
of, you know, but more in terms of procedures that
have to be followed or required by the state. And I
think that eventually the administration felt
that they couldn't handle that anymore because it
would reflect eventually badly on upper-level
administrators who had to oversee this. As I
recall, there was a substantial amount of ill will
generated at that time. Yes. Oh yeah, I had to
overcome all of that. It was really painful, I'm
telling you. So that, yeah, that was sort of in your
lap. Oh yes, I had to take all that and run with it,
you know, and I had to actually work towards
de-siphoning all that, or how do you say it, or
defusing, rather, that negative animosity that
had been built up. A lot of it, I think, just totally
unwarranted, but it was just the politics of the
time. A lot of conservatives that were on the
faculty since then have changed, you know, but to
some extent, much more so. And you're talking
about the upper administration, not the faculty.
No, not the faculty. Although, of course, some
faculty in other departments would also be
overreacting to what some of the things we were
doing, where they inevitably, I'm sure, go up and
talk against us, perhaps at meetings elsewhere if
they had the opportunity. Typical campus
politics. Yeah, very much so. See, we were trying
to get into the real world, and we were trying to put
ourselves not only exposed to theory, but to the
application of theory, because that's where it
really means something, to get out there and
really try something and to test ideas. In spite of
our location in College Station. That was one of
the great things about the Model Cities program
and putting our internships out there. Yeah, that
was a good program that was brought to the
department by Joe and his efforts. John Shanahan,
in fact, was also very instrumental in that
program. He helped Joe in getting that program
established. initially worked on it, and I then
got involved with it myself in helping place
students. And later on, of course, I had to
supervise the placement of students as part of the
department responsibilities. But
interestingly enough, we always had good
feedback from the students' work. Okay, so as the
department became stabilized, we had shown the
administration we were a responsible faculty, we
had the qualifications, and we could run a good
program, a recognized program. I felt good. I
mean, so we had stabilized the program and were
being finally given back the reins to the
department. And at the time, this was in the fall of
74, I got a request from a USAID if I wanted to go to
Central America, to Manawa, Nicaragua, to help
with the reconstruction of Manawa, which had been
damaged by an earthquake. And I had the
opportunity to work in South America. I wanted to
do more of that. I thought it was good for us as a
department and a university to be involved.
Central America and the Latin American region.
And it was a unique experience, actually. It was a
unique project to work in the reconstruction of a
major capital city. So I was, AID said, if you want
to go during the Thanksgiving holidays and look
around, talk to the people over there, visit with
them, they can interview with you and you can see if
you like the situation. You might make a decision
over the holidays and before Christmas and then
we'll know if we can depend on you and you can get
your clearance from the university. This was
1974. In 74, right. This would be in October of 74,
November, I'm sorry, Thanksgiving holidays of
74. So I did that and I went and visited and came back
and I was impressed by the work that was being done
and the scale and the magnitude of the project. It
was a UN team working there, and then the AAD team.
It was about a total of about 50 or 60 professionals
that I would be overseeing, helping the Vice
Minister of Riverland oversee the
reconstruction program, which was vetted at over
$70 million. So I came back and I talked to Ray Reed,
of course, the dean at the time, and I asked Ray if he
thought it would be okay for me to accept this
assignment. I was interested in the assignment if
there was no problem with him. And he said, no, it's
no problem, as long as I can have some time to
transition, meaning that I would have to stay
probably at least a month into the next semester to
help somebody take over the department, or help
him actually manage the department meanwhile
until he could find someone. And so we agreed to
that, and so I went ahead and made my commitments to
AAD and got everything arranged. And I was able to
leave in early 75 to go to Manawa and work on the
project. And I understand that later, Dr. Virgil
Stover was then asked to serve as interim
department head at the time to run the program in
the fall of, sorry, in the spring of 1975. And then,
of course, I was gone for a year. The contract was
for one year. And during that time, I guess, as you
remember earlier, Virgil served, I guess,
through the summer of 75. And Dean Reed had asked me
if he wanted me to hold the position open for me. But
I could be, I could come back to department head.
And I felt that it was not appropriate. I thought it
would be best to have a permanent person assigned
to the department head position. I didn't think it
was good to have interim department heads. It
would just not help us with our marketing the
program. And so then a search was begun. I believe
Dr. Rosler was then hired by the University
Service Permanent Department Head. While I was in
Managua, this all has occurred. I managed then
later on to, of course, be in touch with Dr. Roesler
through communications through telephone and
mail. And what actually happened, I was asked to
stay another year in Manawa. And I got an
extension. The university approved the
extension. And so I stayed there for two years. In
fact, we stayed in Manawa for two years. Very
interesting assignment working, helping
rebuild the major capital city that was damaged
very heavily by an earthquake in 73. the immediate
emergency reconstruction had taken place,
basically clearing the roads and cordoning off a
lot of the downtown area because 90% of the
downtown had been damaged and destroyed. And so
our job was to come up with new plans and what was
called an immediate action reconstruction
program, which is to rebuild the city, and it would
cost over $70 million to do that, to just get it to a
certain level of operation and rebuild the
infrastructure, the streets, new land uses, and
so forth. And, but because of the danger of the,
there were four major faults that went to downtown
and the lack of understanding of what those faults
might do in the future. They had hired a firm from
California to do some engineering work and
geology work. And they did that and they
identified the faults and, and so then we were able
to then make some recommendations based on the new
information. So it was an interesting new land use
planning being based on faults and the types of
soils and what could be, what could not be put on
those areas.
Okay, so then we, the teams were working together,
the AID team and the UN-led team. The UN-led team
was basically working on long-range planning,
and the AID team was working on in the direction of
construction programming and planning. And so
the work had was complex enough and it required so
much effort to put together that I would have to
stay another year. So I stayed another year to
finish the programming of this project. And I was
able to come back right before things got very
messy in Nicaragua when the Sandinista movement
became to surface. And I felt that it was time for us
to get back anyway. I wanted to get back to the
campus and continue my association with the
department program. And so we got back in the
early... Of course, you were there with your
family. Yes, right. My family was there with me. My
kids grew up eating mangoes and learning Spanish
in Nicaragua, the older ones, of course. And so,
yeah, we came back in early 77. We got back to the
campus. And, of course, by then, we had a new
department head. Dr. Rose had been department
head, I guess, by then for about a year and a
quarter, perhaps, you know. and had been
instrumental in giving new direction to the
department with his background and experience.
And I guess had gotten a couple of faculty
positions approved. And I believe Dr. Pugh was at
the time had already by then had joined the
faculty. And we had had another young fellow, I
can't recall his name, was also in the faculty in
mathematical type. I was supposed to be working
with statistics and quantification techniques.
And then a young lady. Who went to Brooklyn
College? Sharon, I think. Sharon. Sharon, I
believe, was her. In health planning. Yeah,
health planning was her area of interest. And she
worked with Don Sweeney. And Don Sweeney, at the
time, also, I guess, had joined our faculty. I
don't remember if it was on the faculty or not. I
think he was working on the health emphasis by
then. Although he was associate dean, I believe,
too. And I believe had functioned at one time
anyway as associate dean and was now also on our
faculty working on the health program, health
emphasis program, which was a growing and
emerging area of interest. And so I came back, of
course. Dr. Rosa wanted me to help with the area of
physical planning and emphasis towards Latin
American region. He felt that my background in the
region would be a strength and also to help with
students that we had, a lot of students from the
Central American and South American area and some
from Mexico that were interested in our program
and help counsel those students. So I was sort of
assigned that kind of an area of emphasis and
concentrated on physical planning and an
emphasis towards the Latin American region. We
had a program, if you recall, we worked with, when I
had been working in Costa Rica earlier, this is
what our department had, we developed a program to
work with public officials in Costa Rica to help
establish planning in Costa Rica, local planning
in Costa Rica. And we worked with a gentleman named
Armando Rouse. His first name is A-R-M-A-N-D-O.
Second name, last name is A-R-A-U-Z. And he was the
director of an interesting institute, which was
developed to support community development. And
so with him, who had some planning experience, we
developed the first planning efforts in Costa
Rica. And his institute then transferred all that
to the National Planning Office. When did all this
happen? Well, that was 70, let's see, it was 73,
somewhere in there, 74. You didn't mention Costa
Rica before. No, I had forgotten about that. In
fact, Clark Davis and I worked on that, and it was an
oversight on my part. When I was department head,
Claude and I developed this program. I had met
some... That was before you went to South America
at all, wasn't it? Well, no, it was after
because... After which? After Colombia,
because... After Colombia. One of the AID
officers that I got to know when I was working in
Colombia was transferred to Costa Rica and was
interested in my helping him with some projects he
was doing, he was working on. And when we had worked
in Cali, in Colombia, He knew my work and was
interested in what I had done. So he asked me if I
would go and do some consulting. So I went. And I
spent some time. And so then he introduced me to
this gentleman from this other institution,
Community Development Institute. And then he
asked me, well, I explained that we had a program
here at A&M. We had been working with people from
South Texas, people in local government. I had
developed a program that was funded under the
National Endowment for the Arts. for public
officials, and Claude and I had worked on that. And
we put it together, and we would bring public
officials to A&M for six weeks out of the year, one
week at a time, and we exposed them to a series of
lectures on planning and design and architecture
and writing, oral presentations and so forth. The
techniques that a manager in a small office in a
small community with not too much background in
any professional area, especially planning,
might be better prepared to deal with consultants
whenever they were asking for work. And so the NEA
thought it was an interesting project, and they
funded it. So we did that project. I remember I gave
one lecture on California planning. Right. All
the faculty somehow were involved in giving
lectures or presentations or showing this or
showing that. And if you recall, we did the same to
the chapter. We had some presentations in Corpus
Christi and other cities, and we did similar
programs for public officials. So I explained
this program to the people in Costa Rica, and they
liked it. They said, why don't you do it for us? You
should do it for us, they said. I said, well, I guess
we could, you know, if there's enough funding to
support it. So then they said they were interested
in doing that. And so then I came back, and a few
months later, a few weeks later, they sent this
check for $10,000 for us to do. And they sent the
check in my name, mind you, you know. And so I said,
what am I going to do with this? I told them it had to
be to the university. So I ran to the fiscal office
and had it cashed and deposited immediately to the
departmental accounts, you know. And then we went
to see the university administration about it.
these clearances that we needed to do this because
they really did it with no warning. We thought we
were going to go into some negotiation period, but
they just sent the money and said, do it. So we were
thrust into this thing. So we did it, and that was
for three years, by the way. It was extended twice
after that. And the last year, I think the last two
visits were handled by Claude and then Dr.
Roosevelt while I was gone because we started the
program. It must have been in 73, 74, somewhere in
there. And then they were, in 75 and 76, I was
already in Manawa, you know. Because I know I,
there was one time I came over, I came back here
while they were having one of the visits. And I
managed to touch, the first one I did handle, of
course, with Claude, the two of us. And then I think
there was one occasion when I came and visited with
him because the trip happened to coincide with my
coming back from Manawa in one trip, you know. I
think what you're going to have to do is get a
timeline on what you were doing when. I know. It's
crazy. Well, you know, I joined, I was actually,
part of the reason why I was coming back to the State
of Los Alamos, I had become elected to the board of
directors of ASPO. I
was interested in joining the ASPO board. Israel
Stolman I had met him at some conference. I think it
was in Atlanta, Georgia, somewhere. And I had
become a young fellow from California who was
interested in promoting the Spanish surname
planner in the field because they noticed there
were very few Spanish-speaking planners in ASP or
AIT. And so he had approached Israel about, you
know, It was an effort that could be made, and he
wanted to establish, actually, a national
association of Spanish surname planners. Who is
that? Gee, it's been so long. A very nice guy from
the Los Angeles area who had some experience in the
Los Angeles planning office and models his
program. I can recall it. Eventually, we can put it
in there. And he somehow got a hold of Israel, or
Israel got a hold of me because he knew my name,
being a member of the ASPO. and IEP and although at
the time Israel was executive director with ASPO
and invited me to meet with this fellow and he
invited us to a board meeting and we tried to
discuss and help him with that and introduce him to
the people there and so then after that Israel
asked me if I would be interested in participating
in the board of directors with ASPO and if I were he
would recommend me to the board for consideration
so he did And the board accepted the
recommendation, and I then was asked to serve one
year, I believe, to fill a position for a director
that had resigned or something had happened, you
know. They needed a person to fill that one year
remaining. And so that's how I got started in
NASPO, as a board of directors, and then... You
were actually appointed first. Yes, I was
appointed the first one year to fill a term that was
left unfilled by... And when you ran, I was an
incumbent, so... Exactly. Then I was... I had to
run then as an incumbent, right? And... And so then
I had to write the position statement like
everybody else did and had to run for the election
and so forth. And I was elected, you know, with a
pretty good margin. And so I served three or four
years, I forget now, as ASPO. And then at that time
was when the merger question was brought up. And I
also had the opportunity to serve on that board to
help with the transition towards merging with
AIP. and create what is now known as the American
Playing Association. You saved ARP from
financial disaster. I'm telling you, that was a
real headache for us because we had a very solvent
operation. ASPO was a very... ASPO was terribly
solvent. Very solvent operation. Good level of
services for the money and everything else. And
everybody in ASPO was very concerned about
joining up with an agency and an institution that
was in very dire economic straits because of the
mismanagement of their money. So we... By John
Joyner. I guess. Yes, that's right. He was
executive director at the time. Of AIP. AIP. And so
as directors, we... Remember the last national
conference when he was executive director was at
San Antonio, and the national never did pay the
chapter back. Oh, really? For some of the debts
that were outstanding. I know it was a sizable
debt. Yes. And so as directors, we felt, I fought
along with other directors for clarifying the
fact to our membership the implications of our
merging, and that we wanted that debt to be cleared
because we wanted to join as equal partners. In
other words, that we would not be zapping our funds
to cover, you know. And so I think AIP went through
some special, I don't know if they did any special
use collections or what, but they managed to get
themselves out of, they managed to clear the debt
by the time. There was a lot of behind-the-scenes
activity doing that, and John Shanahan was one of
the people who helped out. Mm-hmm. And there were
others that helped out as well. Yeah, it was an
interesting experience because there was a lot of
philosophical views. The ESPO view was basically
geared to the public official, an open
organization that anybody could belong to. It
wasn't all hung up with the registration and
recognition and whatever accreditation...
Well, I remember when I joined AIP, there was a
category called provisional membership. Right.
And I stayed provisional member as long as I could
because the dues were almost inconsequential.
Right. And you still get all you wanted. Nowadays,
the students insist on becoming a full member as
soon as they can rather than staying an associate
member or a student member and having to pay almost
nothing. That's right. And so I was... I was trying
to maintain an openness in the new association so
that we could still have a broad-based
organization. Not only have good professional
standards, but also would allow others, because I
feel that the more we can open it up to other fields
and other people, the stronger the profession
will be. So that has... That's, of course,
debatable. What? What you just said. The more we
opened it up to all the other professions and so
forth, because there are Are people in planning
who feel that the sociologists have not done
planning a particularly good favor? Well, yeah,
but we have learned from sociology in terms of
research and... That's granted. Yeah. We've
learned an awful lot from sociology. It could well
be that there's some animosity there between the
fields, you know, but... Well, there is. There's a
lack of understanding of the comprehensive
planning process on the part of sociologists. But
that in part is our fault because we have never
brought them into the process. Well, they've
asserted themselves in their own ways,
intellectually. I'm talking about people like
Mel Weber, but that's beside the point here. But I
just There's room for debate on it. Let's put it
this way, opening it up to also citizen planners,
people who might serve on commissions, who
wouldn't even train professionally, but would
have an interest in planning and should have an
interest in planning. And that kind of openness,
and also a good level of service to the membership
at a minimum cost. And broadening the educational
role. Exactly. And those kind of things were a
concern for us in ASCO, and we feel we managed to
make that transition. It's been painful. It's
been very hard, a lot of long debate and argument.
Then I... Well, ESPO was always strong on
education, outlining commissioners and so
forth. Yes, very much so, and there was a good track
record in that, in fact. Excellent. So there was
that. And the public advisory service. So then the
question became, I guess we were kind of like the
Continental Congress, how do you set up the
administration of the new organization, the new
APA, American Bling Association? so you can
guarantee openness and yet have these
professional standards. And so there was the idea
of creating an institute, the American Institute
of Certified Planners, as an institute that could
be housed within the new umbrella organization
called APA, and that their job would be to oversee
the professional standards of the profession,
education, and so forth, working with ACSP, and
guarantee that the quality would be there and the
registration or the accreditation procedures
for the schools and the certification for the
membership of those who want to be recognized
professional planners. So that was the format
that was finally agreed upon that would give us
this broadness and yet have this guarantee of
professional standards. And I guess the last
board meeting in New York in this year, 1980, 2006
was the last transition from the old board to the
new, finally, APA board. And I happened to have the
opportunity to be on that board because I was
elected to the APA board. I served for four years as
the board of directors. And we're still
experiencing a lot of turmoil from the
transition, interestingly enough, as late as
1985 and 1984. But now the board is much more, I
believe, settled down, and there's more common
ground, less animosity than there was at one time.
Well, there apparently has been a lot of
discussion and debate which has centered around
Texas personalities, such as Bruce McClendon. He
was followed by Dan Lauber from Wisconsin. No,
Evanston, Illinois, Chicago area. Same thing.
Yeah. And then he's now going to be followed by
Duncan. Well, no, Norman Krumholz. Krumholz,
that's right. Krumholz from Cleveland. Yes, he
is. And now he has been followed by Jim Duncan. From
Austin. Right. Well, he was formerly in Florida,
but then now has been recently transferred to
Austin. So we have two Texas planters who have
recently been APA presidents, and I personally
feel that we might be endangering ourselves with a
little bit of overkill. Well, I think some of the
other members of the board felt that there was too
much of a Texas presence, because we also have on
the board... Ray Lou Henry. Yes, just before, a few
years before that, and then we had, we still have,
in fact, from Austin, working with Jim Duncan, you
know him. Oh. Norman Standifer? No, no, no, no. No.
Well, you know, he doesn't work necessarily with
Jim Duncan. I think he was an officer at one time.
Gee, let's stop this. We're going to waste the
tape. Yeah, in other words, we've had a,
interestingly enough, we've had a big repetition
of Texans on the APA board in the last few years,
including Jim Duncan, myself, Bruce McClendon,
Roger Hedrick and Adrian Freund. Of course, I
think Adrian Freund came with Jim Duncan from
Florida. They were in Florida, of course, at the
time, but as a result of their shift over to Texas,
they became Texas. We have had a very large, in
fact, representation on the board. In fact, a lot
of times we're called the Texas Contingent. I'm
sure you were called more than that. You were
probably called the Texas Mafia. Yes, and I think
you're right. There's been some overreaction,
some reaction to the fact that there's so many
Texans represented on this board. But it's
probably a shift in geographic geography that has
caused it. But also, people have run, and they've
been elected. People, I guess, would like us to be
elected to Lopez.
Let's take a look at the chronology of department
heads, if we can keep this straight. Okay. You
return. So Wolfgang became planning...
department head in the fall of 1975. Right. And
then, after several years, I'm not quite sure how
long now. At least four? Four or five. He was
relieved by David Pugh. Right. And David? And
David continued for two years? Three years? Three
years, I think. Yes, three years. I think three
years. He was relieved by Don Sweeney. Right. And
Don then began a whole new era in the planning
department, in my opinion. And unfortunately for
our department, we lost our dean. And he was asked
to become the interim dean. And so Gordon Echols
was asked to become interim department dean.